doc/index.rst, before:

******************************
Python library for *temporenc*
******************************

This is a Python library implementing the `temporenc format
<https://github.com/wbolster/temporenc>`_ for dates and times.

.. warning::

   This is alpha quality software — do not use for now!


.. contents:: Contents
   :local:

____


Installation
============


Use ``pip`` to install the library (e.g. into a ``virtualenv``):

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ pip install temporenc

____


Usage
=====

.. py:currentmodule:: temporenc

Basic usage
-----------

All functionality is provided by a single module with the name ``temporenc``::

    >>> import temporenc

To encode date and time information into a byte string, use the :py:func:`packb`
function::

    >>> temporenc.packb(year=2014, month=10, day=23)
    b'\x8f\xbd6'

This function automatically determines the most compact representation for the
provided information. In this case, the result uses *temporenc* type ``D``, but
if you want to use a different type, you can provide it explicitly::

    >>> temporenc.packb(type='DT', year=2014, month=10, day=23)
    b'\x1fzm\xff\xff'

To unpack a byte string, use :py:func:`unpackb`::

    >>> moment = temporenc.unpackb(b'\x1fzm\xff\xff')
    >>> moment
    <temporenc.Moment '2014-10-23'>
    >>> print(moment)
    2014-10-23

As you can see, unpacking returns a :py:class:`Moment` instance. This class has
a reasonable string representation, but it is generally more useful to access
the individual components using one of the many attributes::

    >>> print(moment.year)
    2014
    >>> print(moment.month)
    10
    >>> print(moment.day)
    13
    >>> print(moment.second)
    None

Since all fields are optional in *temporenc* values, and since no time
information was set in this example, some of the attributes (e.g. `second`) are
`None`.

Integration with the ``datetime`` module
----------------------------------------

Python has built-in support for date and time handling (the ``datetime``
module), which is how applications usually work with date and time information.
Instead of specifying all the fields manually when packing data, which is
cumbersome and error-prone, the ``temporenc`` module integrates with the
built-in ``datetime`` module::

    >>> import datetime
    >>> now = datetime.datetime.now()
    >>> now
    datetime.datetime(2014, 10, 23, 18, 45, 23, 612883)
    >>> temporenc.packb(now)
    b'W\xde\x9bJ\xd5\xe5hL'

As you can see, instead of specifying all the components manually, instances of
the built-in ``datetime.datetime`` class can be passed directly as the first
argument to :py:func:`packb`. This also works for ``datetime.date`` and
``datetime.time`` instances.

Since the Python ``datetime`` module *always* uses microsecond precision, this
library defaults to *temporenc* types with sub-second precision (e.g. ``DTS``)
when an instance of one of the ``datetime`` classes is passed. If no subsecond
precision is required, you can specify a different type to save space::

    >>> temporenc.packb(now, type='DT')
    b'\x1fzm+W'

The integration with the ``datetime`` module works both ways. Instances of the
:py:class:`Moment` class (as returned by the unpacking functions) can be
converted to the standard date and time classes using the
:py:meth:`~Moment.datetime`, :py:meth:`~Moment.date`, and
:py:meth:`~Moment.time` methods::

    >>> moment = temporenc.unpackb(b'W\xde\x9bJ\xd5\xe5hL')
    >>> moment
    <temporenc.Moment '2014-10-23 18:45:23.612883'>
    >>> moment.datetime()
    datetime.datetime(2014, 10, 23, 18, 45, 23, 612883)
    >>> moment.date()
    datetime.date(2014, 10, 23)
    >>> moment.time()
    datetime.time(18, 45, 23, 612883)

.. warning::

   The Python ``temporenc`` module only concerns itself with encoding and
   decoding. It does *not* do any date and time calculations, and hence does not
   validate that dates are correct. For example, it handles the non-existent
   date `February 30` just fine. Always convert to native classes from the
   ``datetime`` module if you need to work with date and time information in
   your application.


Working with file-like objects
------------------------------

The *temporenc* encoding format allows for reading data from a stream without
knowing in advance how big the encoded byte string is. This library supports
this through the :py:func:`unpack` function, which consumes exactly the required
number of bytes from the stream::

    >>> import io
    >>> fp = io.BytesIO()  # this could be a real file
    >>> fp.write(b'W\xde\x9bJ\xd5\xe5hL')
    >>> fp.write(b'foo')
    >>> fp.seek(0)
    >>> temporenc.unpack(fp)
    <temporenc.Moment '2014-10-23 18:45:23.612883'>
    >>> fp.tell()
    8
    >>> fp.read()
    b'foo'

For writing directly to a file-like object, the :py:func:`pack` function can be
used, though this is just a shortcut.

____


API
===

The :py:func:`packb` and :py:func:`unpackb` functions operate on byte strings.

.. autofunction:: packb
.. autofunction:: unpackb

The :py:func:`pack` and :py:func:`unpack` functions operate on file-like
objects.

.. autofunction:: pack
.. autofunction:: unpack

Both :py:func:`unpackb` and :py:func:`unpack` return an instance of the
:py:class:`Moment` class.

.. autoclass:: Moment
   :members:

____


Contributing
============

Source code, including the test suite, is maintained at Github:

  `temporenc-python on github <https://github.com/wbolster/temporenc-python>`_

Feel free to submit feedback, report issues, bring up improvement ideas, and
contribute fixes!

____


.. include:: ../LICENSE.rst

Commit message:

Implement time zone support for conversion to datetime classes
Closes #4.

doc/index.rst, after:

******************************
Python library for *temporenc*
******************************

This is a Python library implementing the `temporenc format
<https://github.com/wbolster/temporenc>`_ for dates and times.

.. warning::

   This is alpha quality software — do not use for now!


.. contents:: Contents
   :local:

____


Installation
============


Use ``pip`` to install the library (e.g. into a ``virtualenv``):

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ pip install temporenc

____


Usage
=====

.. py:currentmodule:: temporenc

Basic usage
-----------

All functionality is provided by a single module with the name ``temporenc``::

    >>> import temporenc

To encode date and time information into a byte string, use the :py:func:`packb`
function::

    >>> temporenc.packb(year=2014, month=10, day=23)
    b'\x8f\xbd6'

This function automatically determines the most compact representation for the
provided information. In this case, the result uses *temporenc* type ``D``, but
if you want to use a different type, you can provide it explicitly::

    >>> temporenc.packb(type='DT', year=2014, month=10, day=23)
    b'\x1fzm\xff\xff'

To unpack a byte string, use :py:func:`unpackb`::

    >>> moment = temporenc.unpackb(b'\x1fzm\xff\xff')
    >>> moment
    <temporenc.Moment '2014-10-23'>
    >>> print(moment)
    2014-10-23

As you can see, unpacking returns a :py:class:`Moment` instance. This class has
a reasonable string representation, but it is generally more useful to access
the individual components using one of the many attributes::

    >>> print(moment.year)
    2014
    >>> print(moment.month)
    10
    >>> print(moment.day)
    13
    >>> print(moment.second)
    None

Since all fields are optional in *temporenc* values, and since no time
information was set in this example, some of the attributes (e.g. `second`) are
`None`.

Integration with the ``datetime`` module
----------------------------------------

Python has built-in support for date and time handling (the ``datetime``
module), which is how applications usually work with date and time information.
Instead of specifying all the fields manually when packing data, which is
cumbersome and error-prone, the ``temporenc`` module integrates with the
built-in ``datetime`` module::

    >>> import datetime
    >>> now = datetime.datetime.now()
    >>> now
    datetime.datetime(2014, 10, 23, 18, 45, 23, 612883)
    >>> temporenc.packb(now)
    b'W\xde\x9bJ\xd5\xe5hL'

As you can see, instead of specifying all the components manually, instances of
the built-in ``datetime.datetime`` class can be passed directly as the first
argument to :py:func:`packb`. This also works for ``datetime.date`` and
``datetime.time`` instances.

Since the Python ``datetime`` module *always* uses microsecond precision, this
library defaults to *temporenc* types with sub-second precision (e.g. ``DTS``)
when an instance of one of the ``datetime`` classes is passed. If no subsecond
precision is required, you can specify a different type to save space::

    >>> temporenc.packb(now, type='DT')
    b'\x1fzm+W'

The integration with the ``datetime`` module works both ways. Instances of the
:py:class:`Moment` class (as returned by the unpacking functions) can be
converted to the standard date and time classes using the
:py:meth:`~Moment.datetime`, :py:meth:`~Moment.date`, and
:py:meth:`~Moment.time` methods::

    >>> moment = temporenc.unpackb(b'W\xde\x9bJ\xd5\xe5hL')
    >>> moment
    <temporenc.Moment '2014-10-23 18:45:23.612883'>
    >>> moment.datetime()
    datetime.datetime(2014, 10, 23, 18, 45, 23, 612883)
    >>> moment.date()
    datetime.date(2014, 10, 23)
    >>> moment.time()
    datetime.time(18, 45, 23, 612883)

Conversion to and from classes from the ``datetime`` module have full time zone
support. See the API docs for :py:meth:`Moment.datetime` for more details about
time zone handling.

.. warning::

   The Python ``temporenc`` module only concerns itself with encoding and
   decoding. It does *not* do any date and time calculations, and hence does not
   validate that dates are correct. For example, it handles the non-existent
   date `February 30` just fine. Always convert to native classes from the
   ``datetime`` module if you need to work with date and time information in
   your application.


Working with file-like objects
------------------------------

The *temporenc* encoding format allows for reading data from a stream without
knowing in advance how big the encoded byte string is. This library supports
this through the :py:func:`unpack` function, which consumes exactly the required
number of bytes from the stream::

    >>> import io
    >>> fp = io.BytesIO()  # this could be a real file
    >>> fp.write(b'W\xde\x9bJ\xd5\xe5hL')
    >>> fp.write(b'foo')
    >>> fp.seek(0)
    >>> temporenc.unpack(fp)
    <temporenc.Moment '2014-10-23 18:45:23.612883'>
    >>> fp.tell()
    8
    >>> fp.read()
    b'foo'

For writing directly to a file-like object, the :py:func:`pack` function can be
used, though this is just a shortcut.

____


API
===

The :py:func:`packb` and :py:func:`unpackb` functions operate on byte strings.

.. autofunction:: packb
.. autofunction:: unpackb

The :py:func:`pack` and :py:func:`unpack` functions operate on file-like
objects.

.. autofunction:: pack
.. autofunction:: unpack

Both :py:func:`unpackb` and :py:func:`unpack` return an instance of the
:py:class:`Moment` class.

.. autoclass:: Moment
   :members:

____


Contributing
============

Source code, including the test suite, is maintained at Github:

  `temporenc-python on github <https://github.com/wbolster/temporenc-python>`_

Feel free to submit feedback, report issues, bring up improvement ideas, and
contribute fixes!

____


.. include:: ../LICENSE.rst
